# C++ FDC library to manipulate 2D/MFM bitstream image data

Work in progress.

## Description:  
This is a C++ library to provide FDC functions. 
Read and write functions mimic the actual operation of the Western Digital FD179x or Fujitsu MB8876 FDCs.
The FDC library is designed to be integrated with the old PC emulator programs.  

This FDC library can handle raw FDD output read data before the C/D separation is applied.  
The FDC library includes a data separator and simple VFO emulation features thus, the FDC can reproduce some copy protection data, which requires precise sub-bitrate data pulse timing.  

**This library directly reads and writes the bit stream data, so the track bit stream data even after applying some write operations, is still compliant with actual floppy bit stream data.**  

### Supported functions:
- Track read
- Track write
- ID read
- Sector read
- Sector write

### Supported floppy disk image formats:  
You can use `*.HFE` (for HxC floppy emulator), `*.MFM` (my original disk format), and `*.RAW` (which can be generated by [floppy_disk_shield_2d](https://github.com/yas-sim/floppy_disk_shield_2d)). The specification of the `MFM` and `RAW` formats was defined by me. That format can preserve precise sub-bitrate pulse data. By default, these file formats will capture the FDD RD data at the sampling rate of 4MHz.  

## API Document  
The API document generated by Doxygen can be found at `./docs/html directory.`  Please open [`./docs/html/index.html`](./docs/html/index.html) with a browser.   
*Note:* You can't open the HTML document from GitHub. Please clone the project and open the document locally.  

## How to integrate the fdc_bitstream library with your program
1. Required files  
- Source codes: All C++ source codes are stored in the `fdc_bitstream` directory.  
- Header files: All C++ header files are stored in the `includes` directory.
2. Classes
- Use the `fdc_bitstream` object to access to the track data.
- Track data is held in the `bit_array` object.  
 -- You can access the data with *bit address* with `bit_array` object.
 -- `bit_array` object has an internal access pointer and provides streaming access. You can read and write bit data sequentially with the streaming functions. 
 -- You can choose two modes when you access by the streaming functions. One is ring-buffer mode, and the other one is elastic buffer mode.
 -- In ring-buffer mode, you can access the bit data with the auto-increment pointer, and the pointer will go back to the top when it reaches the end of the buffer.  
 -- In elastic buffer mode, the buffer will automatically extend as you write over the end of the buffer.  
 - Use one of the `disk_image_???` function to read the disk image file. Supported formats are `HFE`, `MFM`, and `RAW` (`MFM` and `RAW` are my original format. It is not compatible any other existing disk formats which shares the same file extension).

## HFE to MFM format converter  
This project also includes a *simple* disk image converter that takes an `*.HFE` disk image data and generates an `*.MFM` disk image data.  
- How to run:
```sh
hfe2mfm input_file.hfe
```
Note: `hfe2mfm` swaps the file extension from `*.hfe` to `*.mfm` and generates the output file.  
  
## Directory structure
|Directory|Description|
|---|---|
|`fdc_bitstream`|C++ FDC library source code|
|`include`|C++ header files for the FDC library|
|`fdc_test`|FDC lib test program source code|
|`docs/html`|FDC library API document (`index.html`)|
|`hfe2mfm`|HFE to MFM floppy disk image converter source code|

## How to build the test program and HFE to MFM image converter

Build tested on Windows 11 (MSVC), and Linux (Ubuntu20, gcc).  
```sh
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
cmake --build .
```

----

## MFM image data format:
The default sampling rate for the MFM format is 4MHz. The data rate of an orginary 2D/MFM format data is 500KHz. This means, one bit cell will be recorded with eight bits of data in the MFM format.  

`|00001000|00000000|00100000|00010000|00000000| => 0x08,0x00,0x20,0x10,0x00 in MFM format`

```C++
// Header (ofst(byte) = 0)
typedef struct mfm_header_ {
    uint8_t     id_str[8];                  //  "MFM_IMG "
    uint64_t    track_table_offset;         // 
    uint64_t    number_of_tracks;           //
    uint64_t    spindle_time_ns;            //  Time for 1 rotation (ns unit) 
    uint64_t    data_bit_rate;              //  Data bit rate (bit/sec)    MFM=500Kbit/sec = 500,000
    uint64_t    sampling_rate;              //  Sampling rate of the bit stream data     4MHz = 4,000,000
} mfm_header;

// Track offset table (ofst(byte) = header.track_table_offset)
typedef struct track_table_ {
    uint64_t    offset;                     // Offset to the track data (unit=byte, from the top of the file == absolute offset)
    uint64_t    length_bit;                 // Track data length (uint=bits, not bytes)
} mfm_track_table;

// Track data * 84
//   ofst(byte) = track_table[track#].offset
//   size(byte) = track_table[track#].length_bit/8 + (track_table[track#].length%8)?1:0)
```